# Nomad - distributed near-realtime message streams for the planet

### Overview
Nomad is distributed near-realtime message passing for the whole planet. Nomad is a data format built on [IPFS](https://github.com/ipfs/ipfs) and a Javascript module that makes it easy to subscribe to messages streams, compose and process incoming message data, and publish resulting messages to downstream subscribers. 

Devices that subscribe to and publish messages are called software sensors, and together form a distributed global network that processes and shares meaningful interpretation of raw data. Raw data can come from any source, including environmental sensors (temperature, sound, humidity, etc), APIs, databases, or datasets. 

### Software Sensors

A software sensor is a node in the Nomad network that takes zero or more input streams and shares messages in an output stream. Software sensors have a unique identity based on public / private keypairs, and produce signed messages that can be verifiably linked to the originating sensor.

There are two types of software sensors: **Atomic** and **Composite**.

### Atomic Sensors

Atomic Sensors publish messages that contain a single, arbitrary JSON message. They do not subscribe to any other software sensors.

The data contained in a message published by an Atomic Sensor may come from anywhere, including an attached sensor, entered by a person, a database, or a dataset. The role of the Atomic software sensor is to introduce the data into the Nomad network so that other sensors can consume it.

**Hardware + software example:** A single sensor that consists of a physical water temperature sensor that is able to automatically broadcast a message with the current water temperature, to the Nomad network, every minute. 

**Software-only example:** A research team at Stanford that, based on their latest findings, updates a value representing the volume of E. coli required to synthesize biofuel in a given aqueous environment. Whenever the value changes, a message containing the new value is automatically broadcast to the network.

### Composite Sensors

Composite Sensors broadcast messages that contain a single, arbitrary JSON message composed from messages from various, upstream Atomic and Composite Sensors in the Nomad network. In this sense, Composite Sensors can be seen as generating higher-order data and messages. These higher-order messages can also be consumed by downstream network participants and consumers. 

In addition to output data, a composite sensor’s published message may also include hashes of the incoming messages used to generate the output, allowing subscribers to access the tree of intermediate messages that led to the publication of a given message all the way down to the originating Atomic Sensors.

Composite Sensors may also be a mix of hardware and software, or software only. 

**Hardware + software example:** A single sensor that reads data directly from several physical water temperature sensors, and also subscribes to several ‘Water Temperature Atomic Sensors’ in the Nomad network. It then composes the various temperatures into a single average value and automatically broadcasts it to the network in a message. 

**Software-only example:** A single sensor that only subscribes to several ‘Water Temperature Atomic Sensors’ in the Nomad network and composes the various temperatures into a single average value and automatically broadcasts to the network it in a message. 

### Channels named by hash

A software sensor subscribes to channels to receive messages from upstream sensors and publishes resulting messages on it's own channel. Each sensor has a public / private key pair and is globally identified through a hash of the public key. This hash is also the globally unique name of the channel on which the sensor publishes resulting messages. The public / private keypair and public key hash are generated by an underlying IPFS node.

### Event based and query API

The Javascript module presents an event based API that makes it easy to write sensors that subscribe to channels, process messages as they arrive, and immediately publish resulting messages. Sensors also automatically store the list of previously published messages, allowing downstream sensors to access the upstream sensor's history of messages. Message data is stored inside IPFS as a linked list of files (each message is a file).

### Goals and the Initial Scope

For *Creators* of Software Sensors:

* Make it easy to originate, remix, or modify both Atomic and Composite Sensors, then add them to the network.

* Create a simple protocol, along with any supporting ones, that can be easily implemented in multiple languages (e.g.: It will handle the heavier lifting of encoding / formatting / sending / receiving messages, automatic pub / sub to relevant data sources, etc.).

For *Consumers* of Software Sensors:

* Provide a simple, powerful living demo that displays (through new hypermedia tools) the true potential of working with *living data* from the Nomad network (e.g.: New consumption and composition demo tools that show what it is like to read and write living data).

### Goals Beyond the Initial Scope

These are known areas we need to solve for at some point. We believe numerous possible solutions will arise in the creation and exploration of the network outlined above. We will develop these as they become clear.

* Provide an intuitive mechanism for discovering live, relevant software sensors to be used for consumption, composition, and remixing.
